So with the dummy grid created,
let's change these defaults to see what we can do with the grid. Now to customize this grid,
let's go back to our CSS code and on the container where we have display grid, we can now add a special
grid related property, the grid template columns property.
This allows us to overwrite of only having one column and to add multiple columns to the grid.
Now how do we add columns?
You don't enter three for three columns,
instead you can set the width of the columns.
So what we could do is, we could set 200 pixels for the first column and then add a second column by
simply specifying a second value, like 150 pixels and maybe a third column which could also be 20%
of the surrounding container,
so of the grid container.
So now we would get three columns where the first two columns have absolute values and you could use
rem or em here too and where the third column has a relative value, percentage of the grid container
which is a block level element and therefore, which by default has 100% of the width of its surrounding
container, which in our case is the body.
So if we save this and we reload,
now something changed.
We still see the helper lines which is really useful and we can see both here on the left as well as
on the right in the developer tools, that we get three columns here.
These are the three columns we created,
you can see they have different sizes,
the last column has 20% of their container size, the middle column is 150 pixels and the pixel sizes
here
in the preview or on our page simply aren't correct because I'm zoomed in so that you can see it a bit
easier.
So this would be 150 pixels
if we were at 100% scale and on the very left, well there, we got our 200 pixels
and since I got a zoom factor of 240,
this leads to 480 in translated pixels but it is our defined size of 200 pixels in the end.
Now another unit we can use in a grid, a special unit is fraction,
we can also add a fourth column with one fraction, fr and this will split up the remaining space which
is 100% - 20% - 200 pixels - 150 pixels,
it will take the remaining space and if we had more than one column with the fraction unit, it would
split the remaining space between all columns with fraction and the number indicates the relation.
So if I replace 150 pixels with two fraction, then the remaining space,
so 100% - 20% - 200 pixels,
the remaining space would be split up between column 2 and column 4 and column 2 would receive twice
as much space as column 4 does.
If I save this and reload,
now you see column 2 and column 4 are the fraction columns and column 2 indeed is twice as big as
column 4 is.
Now one important note here, you can now also see that we got a solid line on the right of the grid,
previously here,
this purple line was dotted.
Solid lines mark the end or beginning of the grid rows and columns
and since we explicitly state columns here, there is no inferred width or inferred amount of columns or
rows and therefore, the grid clearly ends after the solid line. To the bottom, we still have a dotted
line for the row because it will still keep the flexibility of adding more rows if needed because we
haven't defined the rows explicitly.
We can do that though by going there and adding grid template rows and there we could say the first row
should have let's say 5rem
and the second row should have 2.5rem.
Now we add two rows and if I save and reload, what we can see is that the first row increased in height
because we set it to 5rem and we get a second row which holds no content because we only got four
elements and we now got eight cells, four columns and two rows
but the second row is actually there and we can see it in the preview,
we now got a solid line at the bottom which marks that the grid indeed is enclosed by these four solid
lines.
Now as a side note, if you would add more than eight elements, it would still create the ninth and so on element
in a newly added row,
so it keeps that flexibility of growing if needed but that simply means that we got clearly defined
sizes for two rows and any other row would then again fallback to the defaults
and I will show you how to overwrite these defaults later in the module too
but let's not get too advanced regarding that right now.
Let's focus on what we got and that is a working grid where we can already see that we seem to have eight
cells and that we seem to automatically position the elements there.
Now time to work on that positioning because wouldn't it be helpful if we could for example let element
three take more than one cell because maybe it should overlap two cells? We'll dive into that in
the next lecture.